+++
type = "itemized"
author = "Houston Haynes"
date = "2019-10-07"
title = "03. Early Data Science Experiments"
description = "Academic adventures combining music and machine learning"
featured = ""
featuredpath = ""
featuredalt = ""
categories = ["resume"]
linktitle = ""
format = ""
link = "#"
+++

In the early aughts I worked on the TherapyEdge®¹ application suite. By that time in my career I had already held several positions in development and project management. Having just completed a lead data analysis and compliance position at IBM, I was hired as the Manager of Verification and Validation at TherapyEdge – my first formal role in the quality assurance domain. The application was revolutionary in that it could provide an HIV patient’s medication regime recommendation in a few minutes of processing. Previously, an HIV specialist would take days or weeks to factor in all of the variables with test results and come up with an individual management program. One key to this system was a newly approved method for comparing genotype to phenotype testing – and deriving a “virtual phenotype” model that allowed a regimen to be calculated from the less time-consuming and less expensive genotype test. The other breakthrough was the system’s ability to assimilate and analyze large numbers of patient records to find the most fitting care recommendation for a given patient. The ultimate goal was to create a predictive construct that would help clinicians avoid medication resistance, conserve treatment options and by extension improve individual patient outcomes. This was my first encounter with “N-of-1” clinical trials and related fields of medical care and treatment. And from a technical view it was also a new perspective – this was big data aimed at making a big difference in people’s lives.

My role was both technical and regulatory in nature, and from that I had reporting lines to the head of software and the general counsel of the company. From those overlapping responsibilities I was tasked to lead a matrixed team of medical professionals and software (both development and test) engineers in creating a portion of a decision support system now called TherapyEval. The system ingested large catalogs of medication data curated by the team – both ARV and non-ARV formulations as well as over-the-counter drugs. We also created lists of food interaction and allergy/resistance information which could factor into a patient’s course of care. The technical portion of the system involved determining a correct and consistent scoring model for the type and level of interactions between medications that could be prescribed.

This meant looking at the combination and dosage of active ingredients, which was on a level of detail “below” the prescription itself. On the application side, the resulting calculations were presented as prescription KPIs (low, medium, and high indicators) to note patient risk for a given potential interaction. Along with that base functionality, there was a heavy reliance on medical reference and citation data that provided a justification for the resulting risk score. Also, the reference/citation data was presented through the application for clinician reference/review. Our group’s job was to analyze all of that incoming data, scrutinize each entry for correct data and citation information, and then produce an approved “canonical” record that could be ingested by the main decision engine. As new commercial and generic medications were introduced to the market, or new information was available on existing products and their active ingredients, the group would evaluate changes to the system and ensure that all regulatory and compliance obligations had been met as the changes were integrated into the system. As each version was completed, changes were noted in a management system that was then prepared for submission to governing regulatory agencies. In more recent years the governing bodies have built their own knowledge-bases that health care providers can access. Public APIs such as the one available from the National Institutes of Health supply researched and cited data that obviate the need for individual companies to compile this information. And non-profit initiatives like the HIV Response Database Initiative have taken on the burden of cross-compiling data and establishing a common model for predictive analytics that any care-giver can use. Even though I’m several years past that work, it’s still gratifying to see that similar systems are now part of established common practice. Wrangling those data sets was pains-taking work that required meticulous planning, team coordination and exacting delivery. But it was also among the most satisfying roles of my career.

Recently I have become re-acquainted with the term “N-of-1” – but not in the clinical sense. The term has been borrowed from that field and applied to personal health and fitness, and from that it has come into greater popular awareness. After a knee procedure in 2012 (I was struck by a car while driving my motorcycle) there was several months of rehab that ended up being a major turning point for my overall health. I needed to become stronger, particularly in the lower body. But I also really needed to become lighter. A big part of protecting my knees (I later developed a plica in my ‘good’ knee) was to simply take weight off of the joints. I had to find a balanced approach to simultaneously be more active while also taking off and keeping off the excess weight. Of course, the idea is to have an overall better health profile, so building and maintaining strength (both muscular and cardiovascular) was part of the balancing act. There’s certainly a way to reduce weight by simple calorie restriction, but that can have a negative effect on metabolism, and this can also impact sport/workout performance. Due to my own lack of education in this area, I used that approach for a while, and it didn’t work out so well. So already the N-of-1 methodology was in use, even if the result was undesirable. By the same token, there’s a way to measure workout intensity, but simply going full-tilt in the gym could risk re-injuring my knees (or some other part of my body) and has been found to be counter-productive to other parts of general health. Again, this is a place where I had some negative experience that required correction. So the goal now is to find that “Goldilocks zone” – balancing nutrition with training and recovery cycles to improve athletic performance while also enhancing the way I look and feel. That’s a pretty tall order, and not one that can be filled by simply “shooting from the hip” and hoping for the best. There would be many measure/analyze/correct cycles to make this work.

Like many other people I began measuring and monitoring what I ate by using a mobile app on my phone. I also tried various fitness trackers to gather daily activity and workout data. While it’s relatively straight-forward getting accurate nutritional tracking results from using an app like MyFitnessPal (as long as one is honest and consistent), the same cannot be said for fitness trackers. I’ll save the deep dive on this for the “health” portion of my site (coming soon), but anyone who has some familiarity with this area will know that the accuracy of those devices varies widely, and that’s perhaps being a bit too kind about it. One new device that caught my eye is the Bragi Dash wireless headphones. Not only do they have their own built-in music player, and water-proof housing for use while swimming – but it also has various sensors for activity tracking and monitoring. In most cases this is in the form of a heart rate monitor, but the Dash goes a step further by using a pulse oximeter. This not only can gather heart rate data, but also the level of oxygen saturation in the blood during exertion. I signed on to support their Kickstarter project as a developer, and am currently working with their initial API to gather and analyze that data. The app is simply entitled “Bragi RQ” and the intent is to create an inferential model of respiratory quotient monitoring based on oximetry (from the Dash) as a sole metric. This was inspired by the work of Dr. Peter Attia and his blog – Eating Academy. I will get into the details of the application on its portfolio page, but I will also be blogging about the development process – both on the software and hardware side of the equation.

Along with small-scale gathering and analysis of more accurate training data, I’m also looking at some of the big picture issues in overall personal health/activity monitoring. I’ve been surprised at the lack of sites/companies that help users analyze their nutrition, physical/body metrics and activity data as a whole. Perhaps Google Fit and Apple Health will approach that territory, as they would certainly be among the companies that would have access. But if either framework has those types of ambitions, I’ve seen no outward sign of them. They are collection points – and both have lots of X-Y plots of single data points over time – but they’re not doing anything ‘intelligent’ across sets of data. As much as general awareness is growing on the connections between nutrition and active lifestyle for overall health, there seems to be no real avenue for people to see those correlations in their personal data. In the spirit of N-of-1 clinical trials, I’m going to use myself as a first test subject. While I adopted wpDataTables and specifically their HighCharts implementation for this site, I will also be using that framework to visualize my personal fitness data. This will include pulling the information from the various sites that contain my data using their private and partner APIs – myFitnessPal, Withings, Polar, Bragi and others. From that I’ll create a consolidated semantic layer, and the follow-on charting and other visualizations will be displayed in the up-coming “health” portion of this site.

# The Dark Side of Big Data

While I’ve spent most of the space here describing positive experiences, not everything has been so rosy. And if I’m to be fair about what I’ve learned along the way, I should also include some of that here. I worked in the Artificial Intelligence Group at Countrywide Home Loans from 2004 to 2007. If you’re aware of recent financial history you’ll know why those years “matter” more than others. The peak of the refinance boom was late in 2003, when tax law and changes to regulations governing financial institutions created a (fool’s) gold rush in the real estate market. And to bookend my my time there, the financial crisis began to show outward signs in July of 2007. I use the phrase “outward signs” deliberately, as there were plenty of signs within Countrywide that all was not well in the world of finance.

I managed three groups of analysts that tested the main underwriting systems that provided more than 99% of mortgages funded by Countrywide. Much of the work surrounded changes to guidelines that allowed more loans to be underwritten. This was not something that CHL hid from its shareholders, regulating bodies or its employees. In many ways those regulations were undercut in fairly innocuous ways – much like the “boiled frog” analogy that’s often used. But those changes were within the boundaries set by Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac and the Fed so no one was the wiser. It was when I saw a new loan category which attempted to codify the “Friends of Angelo” loans that my eyebrows went up – and I wasn’t alone. All of these loans would have otherwise failed underwriting checks, or – would have been priced at a substantially different rate than their approval under these “guidelines”. When I (and a few others) balked at this change, executives reassured us that all of the governing bodies had signed off on it. So the work proceeded, and the result is now well known and in the public domain. But the main reason why I left Countrywide in early 2007 was what I saw behind the scenes in “servicing”. Usually underwriting groups don’t see what’s in the servicing database. This is system where loans have been bundled into mortgage backed securities – old business, and not very interesting. This is actually where Countrywide made most of its money. It had loans that other companies had underwritten – not just CHL loans. However, each loan that’s bought by the wholesale group also has to pass the same checks that CHL loans must go through – and those systems are part of my portfolio. Because of that, our group had a specific interest in keeping fresh batches of loan data for testing changes to the compliance and other underwriting systems under purview. One of the wrinkles of the system was that any loan with a credit report older than 90 days would automatically kick out with a “refer” decision. (Refer is the CHL colloquialism for “reject” but was seen as a more palpable term.) So we were in the habit of contacting the secondary marketing group which managed that database and get a swath of loans that recently went into servicing – and therefore still had known-good credit reports that would pass through the compliance engine without tripping over the 90-day rule check.

When we received a sample data set, the record count was often in the millions. This was considered “a thin slice of the pie”, since the full database contained 1 of 6 loans serviced in the US, the largest in the industry. I mention this because when we started getting feeds of data that had almost no prime loans in it (conforming loans was thought to constitute the bulk of loans that CHL bought), we thought the Secondary Marketing Group had either mis-attributed their data pull or was playing some kind of joke. To the contrary, we were assured by that group that the data we received was a general survey of what had recently gone into servicing. If there were no new prime loans there, then there would have been no A tranches in the bundled mortgage backed securities in which they were delivered. This, too is now matter of public record. And from my team’s perspective it got worse than that. When we started to process the “accepted” sub-prime loans through the compliance engine, most of them received a “refer” decision. We scratched our collective heads and assumed that it was because of changes to guidelines between the time they were underwritten/bought and the time that they went into servicing. So as an experiment, I set up a server with a version of rules that would have been used against a batch of loans at the time they were purchased by Countrywide. Again they all came back with a “refer” decision. I noticed that all of the loans came from one division within Countrywide, and began to suspect that certain servers used by that division were configured with a very old version of the rules engine that was known by the group to allow more loans to receive an “accept” decision. When I reported this back to the Secondary Marketing Group I was told that executives were looking into it, but someone that previously worked in CHL’s fraud division took me aside and assured me that nothing was going to come of it. At that point I started laying the groundwork to depart Countrywide, and as they say – the rest is history.

I later took a position at Western Asset Management Company, one of the largest fixed-income asset managers in the world. By looking at their industry position and the reputation of the company, I thought I had found a company with the proper restraint to avoid the problems I found at Countrywide. While the issues at WAMCO weren’t as broad, there were similar points of failure where “intelligent” systems originally designed to flag improper human behavior were ignored or bypassed by staff. It was 2008, while the credit crisis was still looming over the markets, it still hadn’t overflowed onto “main street”. I was managing QA for all four working groups at the company – front office, back office, web applications and reporting. “Reporting” centered on performance – the main mechanism by which company executives viewed trade activity, and secondarily, the system by which traders tracked their bonuses. I spotted a particular line-item for a trading desk having to do with a cross-trade that looked unusual. I assumed that counter-party or trade type was mis-labeled, and went to one of my staff in charge of testing the settlement system. Everything we found there was consistent with the line item in the report, which is both good news and bad news. This is something that would normally cause the settlements system to throw a warning or error, as a cross trade struck at an above-bid price seemed to be a pretty clear violation of compliance rules. I took my findings to the managers of the development groups – assuming that it was a technical mistake that would be quickly corrected. Instead I was told to “go back to QA” and was later informed that I would have no role in reviewing the reporting system. As it happened I was also tasked with improving the overall process of testing and release management across those same working groups, and from that point forward any suggestions I offered were summarily stonewalled. I suspected that I had upset the wrong people at a small company – a company with a “flat structure” on paper, but a tightly guarded (and unspoken) hierarchy that was manipulated to the advantage of long-time employees there. I was the new guy, and was making the wrong kind of waves. After I realized that there was no executive “appetite” to correct the issues there, I left the company. And like Countrywide, the result of Western Asset’s actions during the credit crunch of 2008 is now a matter of public record.

With the release of Weapons of Math Destruction, it will become a form of pop culture sport to malign algorithmic systems. But my experience tells me that it’s not the computer software that’s at fault, but the avarice of the managers who willfully ignore or intentionally alter those systems to suit their own agenda. That’s the most important lesson I’ve learned from this episode of my career – algorithms don’t lie, it’s the lying liars and the lies they tell that are at issue. Whether results come from a computer or a person flipping beads on an abacus, either can be willfully misconstrued to serve someone’s greed.
To blame big data is to blame the messenger.